>>JAY DYER: Is there a
hidden, more esoteric,
deeper meaning to
the Hollywood films
that we all love to watch?
I'm Jay Dyer.
>>JAY WEIDNER: And Jay Weidner.
This is Hollywood Decoded.
[THEME MUSIC]
When "2001-- A Space Odyssey"
first came out in 1968,
it bewildered the entire world.
No one actually knew
what this film was about.
Rock Hudson is famous for
stomping out of the film
during a Hollywood preview,
yelling, "What in the world
am I watching?"
So I think that this film is
one of the most important films
ever in cinema history, and
it bears a lot of scrutiny.
Kubrick used an
opportunity to make
what I consider to be the first
real true esoteric film ever
in the history of
cinema, and which
details the path of
humanity from our origins,
monkey-like origins, all the
way up to becoming a Star Child.
It's a Nietzschean journey and
probably the most important
journey that our
species can take.
And Kubrick has shown this
in a visual way, which
is why the film is so great.
Very little dialogue,
a lot of great visuals.
So in this clip, the monkeys,
the apes, the ape men,
from millions of years ago
first encounter the monolith,
the black monolith, this
slab, inside their encampment.
And we're about to
see the reaction
to their first
encounter as we begin
to realize that this
monolith is actually
passing on viable information
to these man apes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>DYER: What I find
interesting about this is that,
if you read about the history
of what Arthur C. Clarke had
in mind, it was
to be a TV screen.
It was actually going
to show moving images.
And we almost get the
impression that this
is something completely
new, out of this universe,
that's invading the reality
of these primitive creatures.
And it's a transitional phase.
There's a period
in which there are
to be led into their
next stage of evolution.
And I wonder why they didn't
keep it as a television
screen, a moving image.
>>WEIDNER: Well,
it's interesting.
Yeah, Kubrick was going
to originally do that,
and I think he realized
that it was just too overt.
And so he chose the
symbol of the monolith,
which is a many,
many-headed esoteric symbol.
For one thing, it's black,
so it's the nigredo stone
that you need to begin
the process of alchemy.
Secondly, if you look
at its dimensions,
especially in the
later scenes, we
can see that it's exactly the
same dimensions as the Cinerama
movie screen that it's
being projected on.
This scene is so great
because Ligeti's music,
the Hungarian composer,
Ligeti's music
is so numinous, that Kubrick
is knowingly turning this
into almost a religious
experience for these man
apes who are fascinated
by the sharp edges
and its pure simplicity.
And so I think that when we
see this scene, even though it
probably never really
occurred this way,
it does somehow drive its
way into our very being
that we did have
an encounter at one
time with superior intelligences
who influenced us in a big time
way.
>>DYER: I know that in a
lot of religious traditions,
you have the notion of this
completely foreign object,
maybe the ashlar of
Freemasonry, the cube.
You have the idea of the
Kaaba stone in Mecca.
It's the idea that there's
this otherworldly presence,
and we can't even describe it.
And you mentioned
the smoothness.
It has angles to it.
It's something completely
foreign to the rocky terrain
that the apes are used to.
So it's something
that they can't grasp.
It's beyond their capacity.
But it's here to trigger
them into the next stage,
and I think that's why
we see this alignment
of the celestial
bodies and this kind
of astrological significance
that's coming up.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah, well, from
the beginning of the film,
there's an alignment.
The very first shot is
the Earth, and the moon,
and the sun in a
magical alignment.
So every time the
film begins, there's
this magical
alignment, which begins
the magic of the film, which is
the transformation of humanity.
And I think that the monolith is
a superior object in that it's
a cube of space.
In alchemy, the whole
mystery of what we are
begins with understanding
the cube of reality,
which is the three dimensions--
height, distance, and width.
And I think that that's what
Kubrick is giving is a geometry
lesson also here to the apes,
because we know that geometry
is the first step
towards, again, this kind
of self-realized mind.
We all know that
geometry in ancient Egypt
was the very precursor
of mathematics,
and also in Greece.
And I think that that's
what he's seeing here.
He wanted to make
it a geometrical
object because that would
force a kind of scaling
onto the apes.
And no longer was the world
just a natural landscape,
but you could actually
form a landscape
and create a landscape yourself.
>>DYER: One of the things
that I wrote in my book
when I dealt with this film
was that a cube has six sides.
And as you mentioned, it's
all the possible directions
that you can go.
You can only go up, down,
left, right, back, and forward.
And so that cube,
within our level
of reality, our dimension,
is a limitation upon us.
We have limitations.
We can't ever get
beyond those movements,
those spatial movements.
And so the whole film is going
to be about man transcending
those limitations, including
the limitations of the body,
the limitations of death,
the limitations of time,
and aging, and
spatial relations.
>>WEIDNER: That's a
really good point.
Because the cube is our reality.
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: And by having the
cube pointing up into the sky,
he's saying that you
can transcend the baser
reality that you're living
in now and move upwards.
And in fact, the
scene which is just
after this scene, where
he throws the bone up
into the air, and it
turns into a spaceship,
is this whole idea that
there's a higher reality.
>>DYER: Right.
So in the next scene, we're
going to look at the way
that the monolith,
pictured by Kubrick,
actually takes on
a capless pyramid.
So I see this
astrological alignment
as a throwback to Greek
mythology, to the gods.
And what's weird about this film
is that throughout, I think,
Kubrick is showing us that we
have these series of alignments
at each stage of this
evolutionary process,
the transition into the new
aeon of man's development,
or like a Kali Yuga, these
long periods or aeons.
And what's interesting
is, I think,
that we're not going to the
direction of just the gods.
We're actually
looking at a universe
that is something else.
We're going to see
the fabric of light,
almost in a kind of
"Matrix" type scenario.
What do you think
about these alignments?
And what's he trying to
show us with this pyramid?
>>WEIDNER: Well, in the
Hermetic tradition, the universe
and the body of
man are the same.
In other words, a proportion
between this part of our arm,
and our wrist, and the
edge of our fingers
is, essentially, phi ratio.
And so they believed that
there were the sacred numbers.
The moon is 2,160
miles in diameter,
which is exactly the length
of a Zodiacal year, which
is 2,160 years.
And the sun is 864,000
miles in diameter.
864 is part of this 4,
3, 2, 2, 1, 6, 1, 0,
8 series of numbers.
But what I really
find interesting,
especially about that
scene there, was the sun
and the moon are almost
in impossible positions.
>>DYER: I see the divine mind
that basically rules this
cosmos as having some
connection to AI--
>>WEIDNER: Yes.
>>DYER: --to the
monolith, and to HAL.
And I know that, as we'll
see in later incarnations
of this storyline,
Bowman will actually
unite, in the story "3001,"
with HAL, so you have Halman.
And so it becomes a
transhumanist story.
And my interpretation of it
is just that the divine mind
is almost like AI.
It's like a "Matrix"
sort of situation
where man has been
led, gradually,
through this process to where
he can ascend into apotheosis,
to transcend those
limitations of time and space.
In the sequel that
Clarke wrote, "3001," you
have the further ascent of
man in a transhumanist sense,
explicitly where
Bowman and HAL unite
and become Halman, this
new sort of demigod, right?
And I've always viewed
this as a series
or a process of
initiations or stages
to where man is literally being
led the whole time, all the way
back to the primeval period to
this apotheosis, this ascent.
>>WEIDNER: Oh, I think
that's absolutely true.
Because when we're at the
ending scene with Bowman
in the weird white
room, you can actually
hear the aliens, or
whatever they are,
laughing at him on the
soundtrack, especially when he
breaks the wine glass.
So I think that that
is Kubrick's rendition
of this kind of higher IQ
directing our evolution.
I don't think there's
any doubt that that's
what's going on here.
I think Kubrick would much
rather have it be a kind of AI
than a godlike intelligence.
And it makes more sense.
Because what is the monolith?
What is it?
And what is it doing there?
It's some kind of
machine, clearly.
And it's a machine that
emits intelligence.
It's a machine that
creates intelligent beings,
could take a being and teach it.
What the Hermetic
tradition is saying,
why this film was so important
to the Hermetic tradition,
is that the Hermeticists,
the ancient Egyptians,
the ancient people from India,
and the ancient Daiosts all
believed that the universe
was shaped like a man.
>>DYER: Yeah.
>>WEIDNER: And man is
shaped like the universe,
and we are a direct
reflection of each other.
Not a direct-- like
the Christian tradition
where God made us in his view.
That's not what I'm saying.
I'm saying, we're a
reflection, which is
different than being the same.
It's an opposite, and you're
looking back at reality,
and you're seeing it
slightly distorted
because you're looking
at it through a mirror.
>>DYER: Right.
In the Platonic
tradition, you have
the idea of the macrocosm
and the microcosm,
and so man is the image
of the entire universe.
And so there's always some
level of mystic correspondence.
>>WEIDNER: Well, there is.
>>DYER: Right.
And so what I think we
want to look at again
is another initiatory
stage of planets aligning.
So let's go to that clip.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So once again, the
planets have aligned.
And this is where we see
Bowman on his journey outward.
>>WEIDNER: And again, we've got
Ligeti's numinous music playing
in the background.
Those are the moons of
Jupiter that are lining up.
And he's now at Jupiter,
his mission, of course.
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: In their book and
in the original screenplay,
Stanley had him going to Saturn.
But supposedly,
the rings were too
difficult to make by
the effects department,
and so he abandoned it
and switched to Jupiter.
Now it seems odd
to me that Kubrick
could have been such a
pioneer in all these effects,
but couldn't get a ring
to go around a planet
and make it look good.
So I don't know if I buy that.
But what I do buy
is this whole idea
of this German secret
society which was put out,
called "Fire and Ice," which was
about this Saturnian society,
the Brotherhood of Saturn.
It was a Germanic group.
And the rituals, it listed
in this book, for what you
must do to succeed at
coming into communion
with the god of Saturn is you
must go through these stages.
One stage is the primal stage.
Another stage is the moon stage.
Another stage is
the travel stage.
And the fourth stage is arrival.
And these also coincide with
the four levels of the Kabbalah,
where Malchut is Earth.
Yesod is the moon.
Tiferet is Saturn or the sun.
It can be both.
And finally, Keter
at the top, where
you become one with the
universal intelligence.
>>DYER: The crown, the deity.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
And what's interesting is you
have to pass through an abyss
to get to there.
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: And
Bowman clearly passes
through an abyss, which is
the lights plunging downwards.
And so we can see
that it must be
that Kubrick was very familiar,
not only with the Kabbalah,
but with the rituals of
the Brotherhood of Saturn.
And we'll see later in our
examination of "Eyes Wide
Shut," he's continuing this--
not an expose.
It's almost like he's in
it, he's in this group,
and he's trying to show their
rituals, their attainments,
their goals, and everything,
in both of these films.
And I think that these
are the two of, actually,
Kubrick's most personal films.
I know it seems odd to
say that "2001" in any way
could be a personal
film, but I think
it's the story of Kubrick's
own transformation.
Because all art is really
disguised autobiography.
And I think that this is
what he was trying to say,
that he went through
these rituals
and became one with Saturn.
And I think that he
was probably a little
pissed off that he couldn't use
Saturn, that the powers that be
said, no, you're going too far.
You're going to release all
of our secrets in this film.
We can't have you do that.
Switch it out.
And then he said to
Arthur C. Clarke,
I'm going to switch it
out, but you keep it
the same in the novel.
And I think that's why
they kept it the same.
>>DYER: So basically,
the initiatory process
that you're talking
about is aimed
at transcending beyond
Kronos or Titan.
>>WEIDNER: Yes.
>>DYER: The deity in
charge of time and space,
the limitations of that
cube that we talked.
Because with a cube, which,
if you turn it on its side,
is a hexagon, which is the
traditional symbol of Saturn.
That process, though,
is aimed at trying
to transcend these limitations,
that initiatory process.
And this is what's going
to happen to Bowman.
When Bowman enters
into the stargate,
he's going to see this dazzling,
psychedelic light show that's
the fabric or
structure of reality.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
>>DYER: And he's going to
see these Platonic forms,
Pythagorean forms.
And so we want to
look at that clip
of him entering the stargate.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So while I understand that this
is far prior to "The Matrix,"
I read this as the
universe itself being
constructed in a Platonic way.
That there's this
three-dimensional cubic reality
that we've been talking about
that limits us, and here is
Bowman moving out of that.
And you can go all the way
back to Plato's dialogues,
like the "Timaeus," which
is his creation account.
And I don't know
how he knew this,
or Socrates knew this,
or whoever, but somehow,
way before microscopes,
they posited the theory
that the lowest levels of
reality are actually formal,
that they have form.
So you can look at,
like a benzene ring,
it has that hexagonal
structure to it.
So how they knew
that, I don't know.
But I think there's always
been this sense maybe contained
within comparative religion,
the religious traditions,
the Hermetic traditions,
that reality really
is this structure.
It really does have
this architecture.
It's a fabric of
light in a way, much
like what we see
in "The Matrix,"
and that it can be transcended.
There are other
planes of existence.
>>WEIDNER: I consider "The
Matrix" is really the "2001--
A Space Odyssey"
for Generation X.
And it's really that kind of
transformational type of film.
And I think that they
were, in some ways,
consciously borrowing things
from "2001," the Wachowskis.
What Kubrick seems
to be telling us
is that even though he's
going over this abyss,
or through this abyss,
that the inner dimensions
of this reality
are made of light.
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: And what's
interesting about the sequence
we just saw is he starts
out with oranges, and reds,
and all these lower
chakra colors.
And then slowly, he passes
into the upper chakra colors
of blue and purples,
which means he's
transiting from the lower,
the base, the monkey
mind, to the mind
of the Star Child
while he's going
through this transition.
And I don't think there's ever
been a more amazing 18 minutes
of transition in cinema
history than this sequence
here that we just saw.
>>DYER: Yeah, and the
reason that I continued
to discuss those
planetary alignments is
that I saw it as connected
to this seminal scene
towards the end, where
we're actually going
to see seven diamonds appear.
Now this, I think, has
mystified a lot of people.
But my theory is that, if
you go to the ancient world,
if you go to ancient
writers, Aristotle,
if you look at Plato,
the way that they talked
about the celestial
sphere is that there
were seven planetary
rulers or gods, right?
>>WEIDNER: That's right.
>>DYER: And these seven
main planets, so to speak,
are what determines,
astrologically,
man's destiny, man's future,
the fates, and so forth.
And Plato discusses this at
the very end of the "Republic."
There's this really
weird, mystical allegory
where he talks about
this giant clock,
that the universe is kind
of like a giant clock,
and the planets are
moving and so forth.
And so I see this
as Bowman basically
moving out of the
particularizations of forms
that we experience in
our everyday reality,
and he's transiting into the
more abstract, ideal realm
that Plato talked about
of forms in general.
Blue into blueness,
redness, right?
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
>>DYER: And then the
forms, the geometric forms,
that Pythagoras talked
about, diamonds and so forth.
And I see these as the
seven planetary rulers.
>>WEIDNER: Well, they are.
And of course, seven
is, in some ways,
the functioning measure
of our universe.
The moon travels in
seven cycles of 28 days.
The week is seven days.
We measure time in seven.
It's seven chakras.
There's many, many sevens
in esoteric tradition.
In fact, it's, in some
ways, the main number
of esoteric traditions.
And I think what
you're seeing here also
is we're moving from the
universe of light, which is
at the base of the universe--
>>DYER: Yes, exactly.
>>WEIDNER: To
concretized universe,
where the diamond is, of
course, a form of carbon,
and it's solid, and
they're octagonal-shaped,
which is a pyramid times two.
So I think that this is the
point where Bowman is now
moving from the etheric
universe to the more
concretized universe as a
renewed, transformed being.
>>DYER: Right.
You mentioned seven
in terms of diamonds,
and it also made me think of
when you mentioned earlier,
Kabbalah, well, in Jewish
tradition in general,
you have the idea
of the Sabbath.
>>WEIDNER: That's right.
>>DYER: And this is what
Bowman's about to enter into.
He's going to be suddenly quite
old, an aged man, in this Louis
XVI or XVII setting,
almost like a halfway house
before the next
phase of Star Child.
And so it becomes a
kind of Sabbath for him.
>>WEIDNER: I also
want to point out
that the ancients or
Hermetic tradition believe
there were seven
planets, and that Saturn
was the outermost planet, and
that it governed time, Kronos.
>>DYER: Oh, OK.
>>WEIDNER: And I think
that what Bowman does
is he transmutes
time too at the end.
>>DYER: Yes, exactly.
>>WEIDNER: With getting
older and then turning
into a Star Child, we
really don't know how long
he has been in this room.
We don't know how long this
transition's going to be.
And he doesn't seem
to pass from one age
to another in a gradual way.
>>DYER: No, it's just instant.
>>WEIDNER: Sudden leaps.
And so I think that
Kubrick is well
aware of why seven is one of
the most important numbers
in the Hermetic traditions,
in the Kabbalic traditions.
And he's showing us
in the scene that--
>>DYER: Right, right.
>>WEIDNER: --pay attention,
because those who pay attention
will learn.
>>DYER: Right.
And one of the founders
of modern physical theory
or quantum physics,
Werner Heisenberg,
actually has a
famous essay where
he talks about how the
lowest level of reality that
could be looked at in his
time, in the '50s or '60s,
whenever he's writing, he
says that it actually does
display these Pythagorean forms.
>>WEIDNER: It does.
And in fact, if you examine
the shapes of galaxies,
close ups of galaxies,
and you look very closely,
you can see that, yeah,
they look spirally.
But if you look
real close, you can
see the Platonian
solids are actually
embedded inside the geometry
of galaxies, and universes,
in the seeds of sunflowers.
>>DYER: So the idea of sacred
geometry is almost universal.
>>WEIDNER: It is.
It is how the
universe is created.
It's created by measure.
It's created by the
form and distance
that things are apart
from each other,
and those form their own
geometrical relationships.
>>DYER: So this next
clip, we're going
to see the seven diamonds.
>>WEIDNER: Bowman is
leading like Odysseus.
>>DYER: Yes.
>>WEIDNER: Bowman is leading us
through humanity's redemption,
you might say.
The great British
psychologist, Julian Jaynes,
talks about the difference
between "The Iliad"
and "The Odyssey," and
how "The Iliad," we
were in this
amorphous personhood
where the gods were teaching
us and telling us what to do.
Grab that weapon and throw it.
And you think it's Athena
telling you to do this.
Whereas in "Odyssey," which
he named his movie consciously
after--
>>DYER: Right
>>WEIDNER: Odysseus now begins
to realize that the gods are
not as powerful as
he thought they were,
that they lied to him,
and furthermore, he
makes better decisions
on his own than they do.
And in "2001-- A
Space Odyssey," Bowman
makes the decision
to shut down HAL
after HAL makes this screw up.
And now Bowman, who
has been this amorphous
individual the
whole entire movie--
just shadowboxing and
playing chess, and really
kind of a bland human being--
now he's seizing control.
And it always takes
a traumatic incident
to begin this self-realization.
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: And
again, this is Bowman
going through his own
self-realization, which
is really us going through our
collective self-realization
that we are part of a larger
whole, that there are exterior
forces which have a huge
influence on us which we do not
acknowledge, and that
in the end, if we
give in to those forces, they
will actually take care of us.
There's not a whole lot we can
do about where we're going.
We got to just have to go along
for the ride like Bowman does.
>>DYER: Well, the technical
aspects of this film also,
I think, should
be mentioned too.
>>WEIDNER: They should be.
>>DYER: Because this was such
an achievement for this time.
And this was what,
I've read, led
him to be affiliated with NASA.
There are actual documentation--
there's documentary
proof, photos of him
with Mueller of the head
of NASA at the time.
>>WEIDNER: Absolutely.
>>DYER: And maybe
this deal was struck
that he could use the ZEISS
lens to film "Barry Lyndon"
and so forth.
>>WEIDNER: Absolutely.
There was a lot of fraternizing
between the "2001" set
and Houston, shooting Apollo,
people going back and forth,
advising Kubrick,
and probably Kubrick
advising them in some ways.
So I think that, really, the
production values in this film
can't be overemphasized for how
revolutionary they really were.
A lot of the effects
Kubrick did were physical,
even what we just saw.
Those are physical effects.
Those are not animations.
Douglas Trumbull actually
used a split screen machine
to do this.
Those are actually works
of art that are sliding by,
guys are sliding them by.
It's not like
there's a machine--
>>DYER: Those are real heavenly
diamonds that came down
from the cos-- no, I'm joking.
>>WEIDNER: Yes, they're
the stars from heaven.
And then also the fact that
Kubrick, using the front screen
projection both for
the outer space scenes
and for the ape
scenes, he really
became the world's expert
at front screen projection.
There are so many
revolutionary techniques
being used in this
film, it seems
hard to believe that it
could come from just one guy,
but it did.
And even the models, Lucas,
and Spielberg, and everybody
learned how to shoot
models from this movie.
And every great
science fiction movie,
from "Alien" to
"Close Encounters,"
has an homage to this movie.
And I think that there's
a reason for that.
>>DYER: Well, a lot
of times, the people
who oppose those who question
the moon landing and whatnot,
they say that there was
not technology at this time
to fake this.
So therefore, it
had to have been
as was presented to us on
television and so forth.
And I'm sitting
here, saying, look
how realistic these moon
scenes and a lot of this
looks, even for--
what is this?
1969?
>>WEIDNER: '68.
>>DYER: '68.
This looks realistic
for that time.
>>WEIDNER: Most
people do not really
understand how movies are made.
They think they do know.
And they don't realize the
complexity of setting up.
Some of just the basic
shots that we've seen here
took 18, 20 hours just to set
up for 5, 10 seconds of footage.
And in the day of CGI,
this is not appreciated.
But I was in that world for a
long time, of physical effects,
and I know how
difficult they are.
And to pull it off
like he pulled it off,
especially only having
done effects in a few shots
in "Dr. Strangelove,"
his previous film,
to be this far advanced
is really amazing.
It proves that Kubrick really
was a genius, 200 IQ type
genius.
>>DYER: So in the
next clip, we have
the hotel in space, or the
halfway house, between here
and Star Child.
So let's look at that.
So is this like the famous
painting of Michelangelo,
of touching the
finger of God, right?
>>WEIDNER: I think so.
>>DYER: And then "ET"
does that too, right?
>>WEIDNER: Yes.
Yeah, I think he's
touching the--
he's realizing, not
only his own death,
but that the
monolith is actually
responsible for everything
that's been going on.
It should be pointed out that
Kubrick was a chess master,
and could play against 10 people
at once and win every match.
And the whole set looks
like a chess board
with the monolith as
the queen, and then he's
one of the players.
And he's been called
checkmate on by the monolith--
>>DYER: Oh, OK.
>>WEIDNER: --at that scene.
And again, the
whole aging process.
And what's interesting also
about that scene, we missed it,
but he breaks a wine glass
right before that scene begins.
And there's these little
voices on the soundtrack when
he does it, going, ah
ah ah, like they're
laughing at him a little bit.
You can barely hear it,
but you have to listen.
And I think what
Kubrick is saying
there is he's using the breaking
of the wine glass like a zen
koan.
>>DYER: Exactly.
>>WEIDNER: It's to
bust your reality,
just shatter it immediately
in this contradiction.
And so here he is in
this Louis XVI hotel
room, which looks like
the aliens pulled it out
of his skull because he went to
a museum or something one time
and thought this would
be a great place to have.
>>DYER: To stick him in.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
So they stuck him in this
place and then give him, again,
the worst-looking food that
anyone's ever been given,
which is another
theme of this movie,
is how ugly food is,
strangely enough.
And he's eating, and he
breaks the wine glass.
And then he's transformed
in that moment
into the Star Child, which is
where he's going next here.
>>DYER: Exactly.
Yeah, so here, I see this
as him being in between time
and eternity, he's
in a temporary--
>>WEIDNER: Yes, he is.
>>DYER: --housing
space, which seems
to be in his own
mind in some ways.
So he's transcended
bodily limitations,
but he's still captive to
his own self reflection
of who he thinks he is.
He sees himself as
this man who was born,
and who passed through
these stages, and who died.
And so he's still not
completely broken free
from these limitations.
>>WEIDNER: That's right.
>>DYER: And so he
still has to be reborn.
There's a new genesis
coming for him.
>>WEIDNER: Yes.
And that is the whole
point of the film,
is that he will become
self-realized and then become
a superman.
It's really Nietzsche's--
>>DYER: It's Nietzschean.
>>WEIDNER: I think he's
one of the geniuses
of the 20th century,
early 20th century.
And I know Kubrick
really admired him a lot.
A lot of people think that
Nazism came from Nietzsche,
but I don't think so.
I think it was just a
misreading of Nietzsche.
And Nietzsche really did
believe that we were on our way
to becoming a kind
of superhuman.
And I think Kubrick
wanted to evoke that,
but do it in a way that was
filled with mystery so that you
had to work to understand
what you were actually seeing.
And in that working, he
initiates you, the viewer.
>>DYER: Exactly.
>>WEIDNER: Because then
you have to go find out,
what is a black monolith?
What does he mean by this?
What does he mean by that?
And you begin your own
journey, which, I think,
was the greatest
joy for Kubrick.
Because he would keep
all these letters
from intellectual college
kids and things, and he
would write back to them.
No, your interpretation
is wrong.
Use this.
And I think he liked that.
I think he thought
that was really cool.
>>DYER: So now
we're going to come
to the climax, which is
the birth of Star Child,
and we want to see that clip.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>WEIDNER: What
Kubrick has done here,
brilliantly, is he is not going
to tell you what is going on.
He's going to use
incredible imagery, though,
to evoke a feeling in you.
And that feeling is going
to teach you something.
I think that Kubrick uses that
imagery-- and let's face it,
Star Child looks a
little bit like a Gray.
I think Kubrick started
out just trying to make
a regular science fiction film.
Of course, I believe politics
got involved at some point,
and he had a much bigger
budget than he ever
thought he would have.
$10 million in 1968,
'66, really, was a lot of money.
There weren't very many films
being made for that much.
He'd never really made
much money as a director,
so it's kind of odd that they
would invest that much in it.
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: There's a famous
clip from the biography
film of Stanley Kubrick,
"Days of Stanley Kubrick,"
I think it's called,
where the head of MGM
is literally saying,
I don't know what
the budget to this film is.
Really?
The head of MGM?
This is the most expensive
film he's making,
and he doesn't know
what the budget is?
It calls into all sorts
of questions as to what's
really going on in this film.
And also, Kubrick came out
the other side of this film
with a contract that allowed
him to make any kind of film
he wanted to make for
the rest of his life.
And nobody, not even Spielberg,
has that kind of contract.
So Kubrick was a master imager.
He was a photographer
for Look magazine.
He understood the
power of image.
And he never really
got the chance
to spend the money to
make the images that he
could, the iconic images,
that he could in this movie.
And he used his
resources well, and I
think it's really one of the
most beautiful films ever made.
>>DYER: Yeah, I think
it's fascinating
that you could
try to encapsulate
the totality of man's
experience, history,
the meaning of what it
is to be man, within one
single film like this,
and to include alchemy,
and to include
comparative religion
and all these mysteries.
And I think you made the
comparison in your film
to him being like
Shakespeare in a way.
>>WEIDNER: Yes.
>>DYER: The movie
version of Shakespeare.
>>WEIDNER: He is,
yeah, that's right.
Because Shakespeare
was clearly trying
to convey alchemical
messages inside his plays.
>>DYER: Right, absolutely.
>>WEIDNER: But you
weren't really to know it.
So the common guy sitting there,
the groundling, they call him,
he would not know that
he's just been given all
this very high information.
But some people in the
audience would get it.
And I think that's exactly
what's happening here.
A lot of people
are not getting it,
but some people are getting
it, and they're saying,
this is profound.
This guy actually managed to
do what no one's ever been
able to do before or since.
>>DYER: Right.
That's why we're doing
Hollywood Decoded.
>>WEIDNER: That's right.
>>DYER: There are so
many of these movies
like this where we don't know
what the heck is going on.
But I think you actually
can piece it together.
And I think you've done that
well with your "Odyssey."
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
Well, I don't know.
Sometimes, I think it came
from without, not from within.
But truly, truly,
Stanley Kubrick
became one of the greatest
directors with this film,
of all time.
I think even Orson Welles
said that after he saw it.
>>DYER: I was going
to ask you, who
do you think would be up
there, comparable to Kubrick?
Would it be Orson Welles?
Hitchcock?
>>WEIDNER: Orson Welles,
Hitchcock, and Kurosawa.
They're the greatest.
The reason that those
guys are so good
is because they all understood
the technique of filmmaking.
Whereas most people come from--
like Billy Wilder, they come
from a theatrical background,
running plays in New
York or whatever.
And then they come here, and
they apply that knowledge
to movie making.
Kubrick and Kurosawa,
they come out of the image
making area of filmmaking,
and then learned how
to direct actors.
Completely different way.
>>DYER: Join us again next
time on Hollywood Decoded.
I'm Jay Dyer.
>>WEIDNER: And I'm Jay Weidner.
Thanks for watching.
[THEME MUSIC]